---
layout: post
title: "Brass"
date: 2010-06-27 10:24
comments: true
categories: review
---

[Brass](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/28720/brass) is a medium-weight
strategy board game for 3 to 4 players. It was designed by Martin Wallace, and
was first published in 2007 by [Warfrog Games](http://www.warfroggames.com/) in
the UK. Since then, it has been distributed in US, and to date, has enjoyed two
successful reprints. The copy of the game used in this review is the first US
edition.

Please note: This is just a general overview and review of the game, not
a careful walk-through of the rules. There is plenty of in-depth
[discussion of Brass](http://boardgamegeek.com/forums/thing/28720/brass)
in the forums at
[BoardGameGeek](http://boardgamegeek.com), if that’s what you’re after.

A brief rundown
---------------

In the game of *Brass*, you are an industrialist entrepreneur in 19th-century
Lancashire, England. Your goal is to build cotton mills, coal mines, iron
works, ports, shipyards, canals, and railways, each of which can be used by you
(and the other players) in some fashion to earn money and score points.
Meanwhile, the other players are trying to do the same thing – it’s a race to
see who can best take advantage of the economy.

*Brass* is one of those games that encourages you to plan out your actions ahead
of time. In order to score, you have to build. In order to build, for example,
not only must you have enough pounds to pay for the building, but you often
must have coal as well, and you’ll be presented the choice of developing your
own coal mines, using someone else’s mines (which gives them victory points),
or buying coal at the market price.

One extremely cool aspect of the economy in *Brass* is that players influence
both demand *and* supply. If there is a glut of coal on the board, then it can
be had very cheaply. In a coal shortage, you’ll pay dearly for it (as well as
raise the price for players who buy after you). Of course, you can always build
a coal mine to increase the supply, thereby driving the price down and earning
you income at the same time.

That was just one example. There is far more to *Brass* than I’m describing here,
but suffice it to say that it’s a deep, tense, satisfying experience to play.
More on that later.

What’s in the box?
------------------

The physical components of *Brass* are amazingly good, with one exception which
I’ll mention now: the coins. The coins are categorically awful, nothing more
than plastic tiddly-winks that are difficult to stack, and have a propensity
for slipping (and even flying) all over the place. Throw them away, and use
poker chips instead.

Now that the one truly negative bit has been outed, I’ll focus on the
overwhelmingly positive. First, the artwork is absolutely fantastic, very
thematic and evocative of the period. The game board presents the rough
geographical location of each town featured in the game, as well as several
flavor illustrations. The cards are attractive and quite useable.

The player colors (red, yellow, green, purple) are well chosen, and easily
distinguishable. Each player receives his/her own set of hefty and well-printed
building tiles in his/her color. The wooden bits are quite adequate, as one
might expect of any serious Eurogame: black and orange cubes to represent coal
and iron, respectively.

Lastly, I must admit that the rulebook, although well-set typographically and
attractive graphically, is horribly organized. The rules aren’t simple as it
is, and the way the rules are organized certainly doesn’t make them any easier.
Thankfully, there are resources available on BoardGameGeek to help clarify the
rulebook’s shortcomings.

How to play (in a nutshell)
---------------------------

Player order is not seating order, as it is with most games. In *Brass*, the
money players spend is tracked, and the player that spent the least in the
previous round is first player in the next round, second-lowest spender = 2nd
player, and so on. Thus, the player order will most likely change from round to
round. This is a really cool balancing mechanism that I wish more games had.
You have to watch your spending, because this will affect your order in the
next round, and therefore your choices of which spaces are left available on
the board (the early players get first choice of the prime locations).

Another trick is that only the top tile on each of your personal industry
stacks is available to be built. Typically (but not always), the more rewarding
tiles are towards the bottom of each stack, so each player has to choose
whether to build down through a particular industry, or develop the industry
(remove tiles off the top).

The game takes place over two Eras: the Canal Era and the Rail Era,
respectively. You start with a hand of 8 cards, each of which contains either
a location on the board (for example, the city of Manchester) or a type of
industry (cotton, coal, iron, port, or shipyard). Each turn, you will take
2 actions, discard a card for each action. At the end of your turn, you draw
back up to 8 cards. An Era ends when all players run out of cards (not when the
deck is depleted).

As what to do for an action, you may do any of the following five things:

- Take a loan (cash infusion)
- Build a link between cities (canal or rail)
- Build an industry in a city (cotton/coal/iron/port/shipyard)
- Develop an industry (remove 1-2 tiles from the top of your stack(s))
- Sell cotton (increase per-round income)

Here’s the rub: For an industry tile you’ve played to be any good, it needs to
be used, or *flipped*. Cotton mills and ports can be flipped when a player
sells cotton. Coal mine and iron works tiles are built with a certain amount of
coal or iron sitting on them, and get flipped when their respective resources
are depleted. When a tile is flipped, it is literally turned upside down to
reveal the per-round income it will earn you, and how many points it’s worth at
scoring. You won’t get any income or points for your unflipped (unused)
industries, so only build what you think has a chance be used before the end of
an Era.

A good rule of thumb is to try to build more of what other players are building
less of. The demand will come, and the fewer players you have to share that
demand with, all the better for you!

Scoring points
--------------

At the end of each Era, there is a round of scoring. Players get points for
their flipped industry tiles and for their links to industrialized cities.
After scoring the Canal (first) Era, all canal links and level 1 industry tiles
are removed from the board, leaving a partially clean board for the beginning
of the Rail Era.

Elsewhere
---------

In the interest of (relative) brevity, I won’t get into any more specifics
about the rules here, but Warfrog has a downloadable PDF of the
[rules](http://www.warfroggames.com/images/rules_eng.pdf), as well as a [FAQ
page](http://www.warfroggames.com/brassfaq.html) for those that are interested
in learning more about how the game works. You’ll also want to check out the
[rewritten
rules](http://boardgamegeek.com/file/download/2ld7ry1ift/Brass_Restructured_Rules_v1.pdf)
on BoardGameGeek after seeing the official ones! The BGG
[forums](http://boardgamegeek.com/forum/0/thing/28720) for *Brass* are another
great resource if you have rules questions, or just want to read what other
people have to say about the game. Finally, BGG has a wonderful [image
gallery](http://boardgamegeek.com/images/thing/28720) of people playing *Brass*,
some of the playing pieces, etc. All of the images used in this review are
courtesy of BGG users.

The Review
----------

*Brass* is an absolutely brilliant game, and I’m thrilled to have the chance to
share my thoughts on it. It’s certainly not a simple game, and you’ll probably
play it wrong on your first attempt (as I did), but I’ve found it to be a true
gem after several plays, and I don’t expect my opinion to change anytime soon.
*Brass* shares much in common with old-school railroad games, but emerges as its
own unique experience.

Playing *Brass* actually makes me feel a bit like a 19th-century English
businessman. Wallace has clearly designed the game to be thematic. Yes, there
are some niggly rules exceptions, but the mechanics of *Brass* are largely
refined abstractions of business processes from the period. Taking into account
the geographical element, it’s amazing how much complexity Wallace was able to
distill into a really fun, and relatively simple game. The game’s soul draws me
in.

*Brass* can be quite contentious and cutthroat with 4 players, and slightly less
so with 3. With either number, there will always be that delicious tension
between wanting to increase your income, score more points, and position
yourself to grab the prime locations on the board, whilst trying not to run out
of money or have your plans foiled by the other players, all of whom are trying
to do the same thing. There is a lot going on, and there will always be more
you want to do than you are able to do – a sign of a solid and worthy game.
I highly recommend *Brass* to those who like their games meaty and strategic, and
who don’t mind using their first play or two of *Brass* to learn how to play it.

&mdash;Stephen Tudor
