---
layout: post
title: "2010 Retrospective"
date: 2011-01-06 22:01
comments: true
categories: 
---

I haven’t exactly been a prolific gamer over the past few years, even at
my peak. This year, though, my board game plays plummeted, and there’s a
good reason for that. Three, actually. That’s the number of people in my
family now, and 2010 was my wife’s and my first full year spent together
with a little one in the house. It’s been quite an experience, to say
the least!

I still found time to play plenty of games, though, and the overall
numbers for the year were bolstered by trips to the WBC and to
EuroQuest, the latter of which was a birthday present from my family.
I’m grateful to them for helping to make that happen, and I really
enjoyed myself. While there, I had the opportunity to play some of the
fresh Essen titles months before they actually made it to the US, which
was a huge treat. Another boost to games played came from an
unlooked-for source: work. Occasionally, some of my co-workers and I
would sit down to a lunchtime game at the office. These were typically
short “filler” games, but that’s the perfect fit for lunchtime at work.

There is a lot to my gaming history that I won’t share here, but
shortly, it will become clear to most other gamers how much of a
lightweight I am in this world of boards, cards, and little wooden
cubes. Still, I have some experiences worth sharing, and perhaps some of
them will be useful to seasoned and aspiring gamers alike. I’ve
certainly played my share of games… it’s just when I look at how many
plays some other game bloggers have, I look like a halfhearted dabbler
by comparison (and, admittedly, a pretty envious dabbler at that).

I’ll start with an overview of my paltry stats first, then move to the
“special awards”, and finally close out with my personal Top 5 of the
year.

2010 Stats
==========

![Games Played by Year](http://2dr.se/Jwy3/games-played-graph.png "Games Played by Year")

I played 68 distinct games in 2010, and I had 104 total plays all year.
This is down about 15% from 2009, and down about 35% from my 2008
counts. Still, it’s much higher than I would have thought before
actually looking at the numbers, so I’m thankful.

There are only 2 nickels (games that I played 5 or more times) on the
list: *Innovation* and San Juan. I’m not a huge San Juan fan, but the guys
at work like to play it, and I’m not about to argue when there’s a
chance to squeeze a play in over lunch break. Innovation is up there
because my non-gamer wife has taken a liking to it, and has beat me more
than once (further boosting its spouse appeal)!

Of the 68 games I got to play, 55% of those were new games, about the
same ratio as the two previous years. It’s nice to know I’m consistent
in one area: I do like to try new games quite a bit. Of my total plays
in 2010, 47 were single plays, about 69%. That’s pretty close to the
past couple of years as well.

I’ve done a rather bad job of keeping track of my game acquisition
stats, but I’ll hopefully get that in order for next year’s reckoning.
Suffice it to say that I own far too many games for how often I get to
play them. However, I am working on raising a future gamer. Only 5 more
years (or so) till he’s ready for Puerto Rico. ;)

In summary, not great numbers by any stretch, but I played games when I
could and enjoyed other aspects of life the rest of the time. Maybe 2011
will be kinder to this gamer (it’s not looking that way!).

Special Award: Biggest Surprise
===============================

![Dominant Species](http://2dr.se/Jxt1/dom-spec.jpeg "Dominant Species")

*Photo by [Raid1280](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Raid1280)*

The game that totally came out of nowhere this year was *Dominant
Species*. There was minimal news and buzz surrounding its release, but
people started absolutely raving about it once it got published. I was
certainly impressed with it after just reading the rules, but my one
play of Dominant Species confirmed that it’s the real deal. It’s
surprising too how “nasty, brutish, and short” the life of a species can
be.

### Runners-up: Thunderstone, Peloponnes

Special Award: Biggest Disappointment
=====================================

![Twilight Imperium](http://2dr.se/JxOX/twi-imp.jpeg "Twilight Imperium")

*Photo by [Kon Wacht](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Konwacht)*

I don’t like to say negative things about games, so I’ll keep this
short. I sat through a nightmarishly long *Twilight Imperium, Third
Edition* for 9 hours (!!!) on Black Friday. I could have played 4-5
other games during this period that were actually fun. It gave me a
splitting headache and made me want to punch kittens. I was very excited
to play TI3, and was severely let down.

### Dishonorable Mention: Campaign Manager 2008, Age of Industry

Special Award: Best “New to me” Game
====================================

![Twilight Struggle](http://2dr.se/JxCV/twi-str.jpeg "Twilight Struggle")

*Photo by [halobungieman](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/halobungieman)*

*Twilight Struggle* is a mainstay atop the [BGG
ranking](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/browse/boardgame) for some reason.
I decided to find out what that reason was this year, and it turned out
to be pretty rewarding. I played it 3 times throughout the course of the
year, not bad at all for a longer game. It’s a great game that every
gamer should try at least once. I know I haven’t even scratched the
surface of this one. The rules are so simple, but the decisions are so
tough, and the game has a wide-open feel that should let creative
thinkers run wild.

### Runners-up: Innovation, London

Special Award: Best Filler
==========================

![Roll Through the Ages](http://2dr.se/Jwg0/rol-thr.jpeg "Roll Through the Ages")

*Photo by [Gryphon Eagle](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Gryphon%20Eagle)*

I define filler as a game that takes roughly 30 minutes or less to play.
*Roll Through the Ages* fits that requirement and takes the cake. It’s
an incredibly fun and fast-paced dice-rolling game that incorporates a
Yahtzee-like civ-building/scoring mechanic. It’s also over quickly,
perfect for playing in between longer games, or to start or close a
gaming session.

### Runners-up: 7 Wonders, Money

Special Award: Best Gateway Game
================================

![Tobago](http://2dr.se/JxSx/tobago.jpeg "Tobago")

*Photo by [thdizzy](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/thdizzy)*

I was introduced to *Tobago* by Kevin (@seizeyourturn) and his wife.
It’s simply charming, complete with awesome components, an accessible
treasure-hunting theme, and a novel deduction mechanic that narrows down
the locations of buried treasure on the island. Did I mention the
awesome components?

### Runners-up: Acquire, Samarkand

Special Award: Most Thematic Game
=================================

![Merchants & Marauders](http://2dr.se/Jx7u/mer-mar.jpeg "Merchants & Marauders")

*Photo by [Omega Wolf](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Omega%20Wolf)*

Avast! *Merchants & Marauders* be th’ game fer ye. Arrr, it’s a pretty
impres­si’e game, with lots t’ think about and a great feel. On the run
from pirates, I verily felt like a mer­chant in th’ Caribbean, ahoy, but
ye can turn pirate and start collectin’ bounties at any time. Me liked
the upgradable ships an’ the sea bat­tles. A pence for an old man o’de
sea?

### Runners-up: Tales of the Arabian Nights, Railways of the World

Special Award: Lunch @ Work Game
================================

![Carcassonne](http://2dr.se/Jxi8/carc.jpeg "Carcassonne")

*Photo by [ZaNaBoZa](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/ZaNaBoZa)*

What plays quickly and has the shortest possible setup time?
*Carcassonne*, of course. Just set out 2 stacks of tiles, and off you
go. This one has turned out to be ideal for lunchtime gaming at the
office. I’m not very good at Carc, nor do I own a copy, but I’ll almost
never turn down a game of this if I’m at the office and have time (the
latter condition occurs less often these days, sadly).

### Runners-up: San Juan, Mamma Mia

Top 5 Games of 2010
===================

Just a note of clarification. Before I get into these, let me point out
that **none of this really means anything**. My thoughts on these games
are purely subjective, so I encourage you to take it with a grain of
salt, and post your own reviews if your tastes differ from mine.

5. [Merchants & Marauders](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/25292/merchants-marauders)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Merchants & Marauders](http://2dr.se/Jx5z/mer-mar2.jpeg "Merchants & Marauders")

*Photo by [Henk Rolleman](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/henk.rolleman)*

I really want to play this one more, and I really can’t say that about
most games these days. An automatic berth on the 5-spot.

4. [Endeavor](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/33160/endeavor)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

![Endeavor](http://2dr.se/Jwo1/endeavor.jpeg "Endeavor")

*Photo by [Matic](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Matic)*

It’s a good sign that I’m still into this one. I heavily anticipated
*Endeavor*’s release and haven’t been disappointed in it one iota.
*Endeavor* boasts a tense balance of timing, area control, hand
management, and action optimization, all within an attractive and
accessible package.

3. [Race for the Galaxy](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/28143/race-for-the-galaxy)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Race for the Galaxy](http://2dr.se/JwiF/race.jpeg "Race for the Galaxy")

*Photo by [Utumo](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/Utumo)*

I’ve been pretty high on *Race* this year. Its depth and richness of
strategy is tough to beat, and it’s just a card game! Experienced
players can also play this pretty quickly, a big plus. I probably have
about 100 plays of this under my belt, by far my most-played game. With
the 3 expansions, Race continues to challenge and mystify me.

2. [Innovation](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/63888/innovation)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Innovation](http://2dr.se/Jy4K/innovation.jpeg "Innovation")

*Photo by [EndersGame](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/EndersGame)*

A highly impressive game from the designer of *Glory to Rome*. Its one
problem is in scalability: it has a very zero-sum feel for two players,
but may be too chaotic with four. Three seems to be the sweet spot. Yes,
there is randomness and chaos, but such is the nature of card games, and
it plays so fast that it’s easy to just start over with a new game.

And that leaves us with my favorite game of the year:

1. [Troyes](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/73439/troyes)
----------------------------------------------------------------

![Troyes](http://2dr.se/JxYf/troyes.jpeg "Troyes")

*Photo by [lacxox](http://www.boardgamegeek.com/user/lacxox)*

*Troyes* is a really special game, of a breed I haven’t seen a lot of in
my short gaming career. I’ve been trying to stay away from the 2010
Essen games, but in this case I just can’t resist *Troyes*. It’s right up
there with El Grande and Caylus as one of the finer examples of modern
game design. I don’t know that *Troyes* will ever be ranked as highly as
those, but it’s a deceptively deep game with a lot going on, making for
a nice blend of tactics and strategy. The dice mechanic is a stroke of
absolute brilliance.

### Honorable Mentions: Twilight Struggle, Macao, London

That’s it!
==========

Well, that’s all I’ve got. What do you think of my Top 5, and how would
yours be different? What were some other games you enjoyed this past
year? Feel free to hit me up on Twitter or post comments below.

This “Year in Review” article was heavily inspired by
[Hiew Chok Sien](http://hiewandboardgames.blogspot.com/2010/12/my-2010.html) and
[Chris Norwood](http://gamerchris.com/2011/01/06/2010-year-in-review.aspx?ref=rss),
whose stalwart gaming blogs are radiant lighthouses to my dim,
flickering flashlight.

